From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes.
Oh, weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing your
show. Number four 11 recorded
live Thursday, February 13, 2014.
This episode of Hansel minutes
is brought to you by
teller offering the best in
developer tools and support online@telerikdotcomandbyfranklins.net
makers of gesture pack a
powerful gesture, recording and recognition
system for Microsoft connect for
windows developers details@gesturepak.com. In this
episode, Scott talks to james'
friend, all there of PCE
dot JS, which is support
of PCE. The portable computer
emulator. This is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes, and I'm talking
with James friend and he
has a website@jamesfriend.com.edu. And he
has made a port of
the PCA may later, PCE
dot JS is his port.
And I'm actually looking at
a Mac plus emulator in
my browser. You've made not
just the simulator, but a
number of emulators haven't you
changed a yep. Yep. And
you seem very casual about
that. Like, Oh yeah. You
know, he's just over here
emulating the IBM PC in
a browser. No problem. That's
amazing. You don't you think
that's amazing. I think it's
amazing. I think it's amazing
that it can be done
for sure. I think it's
amazing that the web platform
has gotten to the point
where we can make these
things run in the browser
across different, different hardware and
different operating systems. And this
isn't, this isn't faked. I
think we've seen lots of
things where we'll have JavaScript
and HTML and someone will
make a, a windows interface
or a Mac interface and
it'll look and feel like
it. But it's not really,
it is, this is really
emulating the CPU. This is
pretending to be a 68,000
emulator. That's 68,000 processor, the
Mac, the Mac doesn't know
that it got booted up
inside a browser. So basically,
yeah, it's just loading the
original startup code, the original
68 machine code. It's a
60, 68 K process. And
the amount of Ram that
was in original and same
input and output devices. And
it's just running as if
it's a real math class.
And so like you said,
the rom is totally unmodified.
Yeah. Except the emulator itself
does patch around slightly so
that it intercepts when the
computer tries to access the
floppy. So that basically floppy
drives. I think they required
a bit of delicate, you
know, timing that had to
be quite precise and to
do with the way the
disc expands and stuff. So
the emulator itself, actually the
original, I mean, it was
a path that was written
by the original author, not
myself, a really impressive guy
code. I think it's hamper
hug the guy who wrote
the PC emulator. Originally it
basically overrides some of the,
the Mac pluses wrong with
just a little bit of
code to tell emulator, Hey,
we're using the disc now,
like jump out into of
the emulated code, jump out
of the real macro ifs
and into the emulator. So
we can do some disc
input and output. So the
original emulator and there's delusion
millions of millions, but there's
hundreds of emulators out there.
It seems like if you're
into computer science, at some
point, you're going to write
an emulator of some kind
and a hamper hug wrote
a thing called PCE. And
he's got an Atari st
and IBM PC and Mac
plus. So he's not just
emulating 68 thousands, but also
80 86, 81 86. And
of course, since, since the
Atari S T was a
68,000, it's using the same
part of his emulator. Yeah.
I think he added, I
think, yeah, it's 68. I
wanna as well for that.
And this was written in
what idiomatic C or C
plus plus. So in fact,
the main reason that I
chose this particular emanated project,
because it's, in some ways
it's less, it's not well
known the way that say
the Mac mini the Mac
is probably the most widely
used and well-known classic Mac
emulator, but this code of
pieces, so absolutely clean and
easy to understand the way
that it just has very
careful responsibility of ownership of
various, you know, various bits
of state. There's basically just
a big structure that describes
the current state of the
CPU and a structure that
describes the current state of
the system. And then they
just get passed through really
easy to understand and well
broken down functions. So in
fact that the fact that
it was this really straightforward
code to a person who
who's looked at a few
emulated code bases and that
it was just POC, there
was not assembling was critical
to me being able to
pull this off. I think
I see. Yeah, for example,
if it was assembly and
that I couldn't port it
to the browser, because the
way that I bought it,
it was using M script
in which can, can compile
C and C plus plus
to the LLVM intermediate representation
and then convert that to
JavaScript. So it has to
be high level Cody. That's
not tied to a particular
architecture. So it's interesting that
you're saying that that's the
C, which I think most
of us think of as
being low-level code has to
be sufficiently high level enough
for it to move over
to a am script. And,
and the LLVM Right. Well,
I mean, C was into
a lot of people, the
original portable language, you know,
you could, that was what
was great about C when
it first came out, because
at the time people were
still writing things in, you
know, like the assemble of
a PDP tan or whatever,
or the assemble of various
different completely separate computer architectures
and see was this code
is a language that could
be compiled to all of
those architectures and to us
now, that just sounds like,
well, of course, if you're
going to support a certain
language on a certain platform,
it needs to composite, but
at the time that was,
you know, the original portable
language. So it has to
be portable C can't do
really crazy stuff with like
costing values to completely different
Val completely different types that
will then potentially rely on
some thing that happens only
on certain architectures. For example,
only works on an architecture
where, and it is worth
this, you know, this size
or whatever. So to that
in that way, it has
to be portable together. We
compile it by unscripted and
PC satisfies that Did em
script and do what you
needed it to do. Is
it just a matter of,
Oh, I'm not going to
use GCC, I'll use script
in and I'll run it
through. And then this low-level
virtual machine stuff will pop
out the other side. Or
did you have to modify
in the script? Well, it's
in the core of what
it does. Subscription is quite
relatively easy to use for
someone who's both familiar with
the traditional GCC make kind
of tool chain of compiling
C applications, and also familiar
with JavaScript and JavaScript tools.
But basically it does have
the drop in replacement for
make and configure. However, that's
not really going to guarantee
that the code is going
to build or work properly,
especially considering that, you know,
on, on a particular system,
you might have lots of
different lives and still a
really common one is these
days is SDL, which is
a really useful library for
abstracting input and output as
keyboard mouse drawing to the
screen sound. So you can
just write your application against
SDL and it'll ideally work
on any platform that supports
us, whether it's like Mac
windows, Linux, And SDL is
the simple direct mail. Yep.
Yep. So that was a
really handy tool for people
doing games and emulators and
things like that that has
been around for a few
years. So that's something that
someone might have installed on
their computer, but in the
browser, we can't really access
any COVID other than what
we've loaded ourselves. So things
like SDL have to actually
be included with the, the,
the code that's being built
for the browser, but actually
what I'm scripting have done
have sort of, that's sort
of a reimplemented SDL. So
in terms of things like
canvas, so rather than drawing
to the screen, it draws
to a canvas and rather
than outputting audio to what
have your output devices, I
guess, on, on Lennox, it's
like a sound or it
is on the, in browser,
my output as eczema, five
web audio, data API, or
audio tag or whatever,
hang on though, to put
this in the information for
the audience who may not
have all of this. So
if you're saying, if I
understand correctly, like what people
usually think of when they
think of SDL, the simple
direct media layer is this,
this layer that lets you
give access to your audio,
your keyboard, your joystick, and
then underneath it is usually
either open GL or direct
3d. And you're saying on
the side of M scripting,
which takes the LLVM bite
code and turns it into
JavaScript, they have put canvas
underneath that and HTML five
audio where we would ordinarily
expect to see open GL
or direct 3d. Is that
correct? Yeah. So basically a
prescription comes with a bunch
of re implementations of various
popular libraries. So there's SDL,
there's some open DL tools,
some different kinds of IO
tools like X 11. And
it's got these little JavaScript
implementations of those things in
terms of the tools we've
got in the browser. So
canvas for graphics out, putting
a display, and yet we
have audio API for audio
and just, you know, mouse
events, for example, it can
take a mouse and keyboard
events and turn those into
SDL key presses and mouse
events in SDL zone representations
of those things. So COVID,
that's already been built to
use STL for its keyboard
and mouse input, for example,
should just what, when combined
with some script and, and
it's, it's really does a
lot to make it easy
to, to rebuild those code
there's code base in the
browser. Okay. So you take
the portable C from PCE,
the original C version of
PC, and you use LLVM
GCC, or you use Klein
and then LLVM pops out
the other side and then
you take that, and that
turns into Java, Right? So
that's the core part of
subscription apart from the fact
that prescription has all these
nice tools to basically drop
in place of a GCC,
for example, has something called
MP MCC, but that's really
just a wrapper around a
PCC client. But then with
that output, which is what's
called LLVM intermediate representation, which
is kind of like LLVM
biker, I guess it takes
the theme script and compile
it takes that and converts
it into first, I think,
naive JavaScript. And then it
has so like an exact
representation of an exact kind
of JavaScript replica of the
LVM by code. And then
it takes that and tries
to optimize it so that
it's not a huge, huge
block of code. It does
end up still being fairly
large amount of code, but
because there's a lot of
redundancy, you know, once they
actually load it in the
browser, various magic that we
all benefit from every day,
like, geez, a compression turns
that into something that's manageable.
So, so that the output
is basically this, this JavaScript
code, which only deals in
values. Like it only deals
in the numbers, right? And
it's got a big type
array, which is a feature
that's added in HTML five
to JavaScript, which basically allows
you to have an array
of just raw data that
you can look at as,
as different kind of types,
like, you know, an eight
the end. And so that's
like the memory that you,
that this application has access
to just like on, in
native code, you would have
like a, a big chunk
of memory of the application
can use. And so that
all that comes together to
basically run a kind of,
something like that. LLVM intermediate
presentation in your browser is
JavaScript. How much do you
have to change the resulting
C? Is this how much
of this is bringing libraries
together and making a build
system versus actually having to
go in and patch a
in this case, hamper hugs,
original C coat, cause I'm
looking at the history and
your, and your good hub
here. And it looks to
me like you are having
to poke around and, and
change things at the C
level that will then affect
how your JavaScript emulator runs.
Right? And so that's kind
of why to be able
to do this project I
needed to have as well
as a good understanding of
emulators and how they tend
to be written and a
good understanding of how JavaScript
runs in the browser. And
you know, what the nature
of the browser environment is
because I also had to,
you know, be fairly solid
on my C actually went
through set shows, learn, see
the hard way, just to
make sure that I was
like burned up on my,
on my C before I'm
diving into making lots of
changes to this code base.
But I think in the
end, the changes ended up
being fairly precise. I mean,
some of them will have
comment above that says, this
is a bit of a
hat, like for example, to
get the mouse working the
way that it looks really,
really nice for users and
the way that people expect
from using say VMware or
whatever, basically you need the
mouse to just go wherever
they've got the mouse over,
hovering over the window, you
know, whereas a lot of
emulators required to actually take
control of the mouse. And
so, you know, you have
to click on them and
then that captured your mouse.
I was basically doing this
kind of neat or gross
hat, depending on your perspective.
Well, according to line four
39 of command 68, K
it actually says gross hacks
to set mouth position in
browser. So it sounds like
you felt it was gross
at the time. Yeah. And
it certainly grows in terms
of it's what it's doing
is getting the mouse position
from the process in terms
of, you know, the browser,
the actually through the stubbed
out SDL code. So it's
using an SDL method, which
inscription is then implemented in
terms of, you know, mouse
events or to, to basically
get the position of a
mouse relative to the canvas.
And then it's like converting
that into and poking into
memory, the values in the
actual emulated Mackowitz of where
the mouse position is. So
in the emulated macro S
Kurt is running, you know,
there'll be some routine where
it updates the mouse position.
And basically there's a certain
location in memory, which made
this quite easy because any
original MapQuest that had these
things code, hi Lily memory
coils, which are just a
bunch of global variables for
the whole operating system, I
wanted them to select the
mass position. And so I
was able to poke the
value of the mouse X
and Y coordinates straight into
macro S memory, which is
something you couldn't do on
a, on a, on an
operating system is all this,
the layers of indirection and
protection of memory. That, that
seems simple, like when you're
like, Oh, you know, I
just kind of poke this
in memory. I'm looking at
the code here though. And
it's seems pretty specific. I
mean, it's basically magic numbers.
You're going and saying, take
this 16 bit integer and
here's the mouse, Y and
then you're basically shoving into
the three separate locations. How
in the world would you
know those locations? How would
you figure that? Well, fortunately,
some people have gone to
the effort of figuring out
what all the, these low
memory global variables are for
the original Mac iOS. I
found some document on a
website of, I think it's
like a Linux that, that
someone made for 68 K
Motorola processes. So a Linux
destroyed that could run on
the original Mac will probably
many years after the fact.
And so they documented all
this, all these magic locations
that you can put things
like mouse position. I think
they would probably would be
a nicer way to have
implemented it, like this way
that the floppy drive works
in PC. Is it actually
just once the operating system
tries to access the faulty
drive PC, you just kind
of traps that and says,
all right, well, we'll just
actually do something else, like
go on to the system's
hard drive and grab out
what the floppy disk image,
but that would be a
lot more complicated. Cause it
actually involves writing some 68
K assembly code kind of
like a little custom driver
and injecting that into, into
the emulated macro. So what
I did was a lot
simpler, just poking and values
where Matt versus going to
look for the mouse position,
but it seems to work
pretty well. That works pretty
clearly. I wonder though, when
you're putting together an emulator
like this, I feel like
there must be a moment
or a number of moments
or a long time actually,
before anything actually happens when
you're just trying to get
this thing to start up.
And you're kind of feeling
around in the dark. And
then if a bug like
this came along, or you
didn't like the way the
mouse was behaving, I think
maybe myself and maybe people
that are listening would just
kind of give up. They're
like, you know, heck if
I know I'm, I'm amazed,
the thing works. Right? Yeah.
And to be honest, I
wasn't really sure if this
was even going to be
possible. When I started, I
had this idea sort of
a rough feel of, you
know, what can be done
in the browser, the other
previous emulator in the browser
projects that people had done,
like, you know, there's like
an Apple two in the
browser. And I can't remember
what the one who really
saw that made me think
that I could do this,
but I think probably February
spill, odds, x86 simulator, and
the brother, which he actually
wrote, you know, from scratch
it's Java script from scratch,
emulating an x86 CPU. And
when that came out, everyone
was just, you know, on
hacker news, everyone was amazed
that this could be done.
And I think once I
saw that, I figured, you
know, if you can do
that and I said, he's
a CPU emulator, then I
think this can be done.
So once I go past
that point of at least
having some confidence about it
and, and seeing what people
were achieving with him scripting
as well, in terms of
being able to compile existing
bases, like the, the unreal,
the unreal engine demo, the
Epic Citadel, which has successfully
compiled the unreal game engine
to run in the browser
and unscripted at, at, you
know, perfectly acceptable frame rate.
So I, I, I felt
like this was, this was
doable, but then I had
to find an emulate, a
code base that was understandable
to me. And, and to,
to the degree that I
needed to be able to
actually get things working. And
I found that in PCA
and then from there on,
it was just a lot
of trying to get billed,
looking at the errors spewing
out of scriptings rapid GCC
LLVM, and then, you know,
slowly one by one going
through and trying to figure
out what, what it was
complaining about. And then, and
then it goes to the
browser. Something was running the
browser. There was no visual
output. I couldn't really tell
if it was working or
not, because an emulator can
run without a screen that
an input it's just a
ambulated computer, so it can
be running along and churning
through instructions. And, and so
you have to really kind
of have a bit more
visibility of what it's doing.
So I looked at, you
know, what the emulated CPU
was doing, where it was
moving through the macaronis code.
And even then, you know,
it's possible that it sort
of doesn't, it's turning through,
but it doesn't really understand
what's happening, but I was
able to follow it, moving
through the code in the
way that according to the
comments that some people have
nicely provided for the macro
from indicated where it should
be going. And then from
there, I could tell that
know, things were kind of
working. And I looked at,
okay, so PC outputs, the
display through, through SDL, but
it's not working yet, but
I was able to kind
of like, see in memory
the, the in-memory representation of
what's on the display. So
I could, I could tell
that that was like up
on truth. There was like
a quiet of one of,
because the macro West boot
screen was originally this kind
of like black and white
grid. So one black pixel,
one white pixel by pixel.
And so I could see
that in memory. I know
you're saying you can see
that in like, in like
F 12 tools. You're seeing
this in JavaScript in a
binder. No, no, no. It's
actually in the C the,
the, within the memory that
inscription has. So inscription is
kind of like another level
on top of that. It's
like, it's got this, this
type of Ray that represents,
you know, the, the memory
that's available from scripting, and
then inside that you've got
your C code running. So
I was able to kind
of like edit the C
code of PCE to dump
out what was in its,
it's sort of like frame
buffer, it's screen, you know,
simulated screen. And then, and
then, so I came to
the realization that I was
running into the problem that
every unscripted and quartered application
has, which is that the
browser can't just run code
indefinitely. It can't just keep
running a piece of code
that never stops and yields
back to the browser. That's
why that's what happens when
you see those, those error
messages that say an unresponsive
script is, is probably on
the page. The crowd you're
detecting that an infinite loop
is it's just like, this
has been going for 20
seconds and it never seems
like it's going to stop.
Right. And that's because the
way that a JavaScript code
runs in a browser, it
does have to regularly yield
back to the browser's main
event loop so that the
browser can do other things
like update the screen updates,
the display of, of the
page in the browser window.
So I had to find
a way to take this
program that was designed as
most emulators are to just
run infinitely and an infinite
loop. I had to break
that up into little manageable
bite sized chunks for the
browser. And so I was
able to do that by
basically going to the, the
main loop of the emulator.
Most simulators have this main
loop that just updates a
few things and then runs
some CPU cycles. And then
it loops around. And I
was basically, I would have
to break that up to
say, only run a few,
say 10,000 cycles of the
CPU, and then stop. And
then the, the browser basically
does kind of like a
set time out to say,
you know, as soon as,
as soon as you finished
doing other things, add into
the schedule to, to run
another of those batches of
10,000 CPU cycles. So once
that was happening, a whole
lot of other stuff started
magically working like the output
to the log that the
emulator, which is kind of
like the standard output SI
started spewing out all these
quality messages. Because up until
that point is infinite loop
was blocking the browser from
actually updating, you know, anything
else on the page, not
just the screen, but I'll
just say emulate the screen.
But the, just the log
saying, you know, the emulators
managed to load this disc
image. It's managed to start
the CPU it's allocated this
much ambulated memory. And so
once I saw that, I
was like, well, things are
working. And from there, it
wasn't, it wasn't much to
just figure out how to
actually get the display hearing
in the canvas. And it
was just a matter of
the fact that PC or
the outputs RGB. So like
eight bits of red, eight
bits of green it's blue.
Right. Whereas canvas typically expects
RGBA so it expects an
extra alpha channel. And so
when I was copying, I
just had to add like
a little, a little bit
of extra code to M
script. And so that when
copying the kind of frame
buffer from the emulated memory.
So like the Mac computers,
like it's drawn the screen
into its emulated memory. It's
like, okay, so this is
what's on the screen, normally
in a real computer, the
video record or whatever would,
would grab that from memory
and put it out on
a display, the emulator kind
does the same thing. It
just grabs what's in the
max memory and in the
frame buffer and outputs it
by SDL to the SDL
window. So basically in the
process of doing that, I
just had to convert it
from RGB to RGBA by
just adding a full, you
know, fully pass it a
value for each pixel for
its alpha channel. So you
ended up with an eight,
eight, eight, eight RGBA output.
So that's eight bits for
each channel and the opposite,
and then magically it was
appearing in the canvas. I
don't know you've been working
on it for, I don't
know, several weeks at that
point. So it was, it
was quite fortunate that, that
I, I did this project
when I had a lot
of free time in between
jobs. And when I got
to that point, I felt
like I hadn't been wasting
my time for all that
time that, you know, in
between getting a new job,
I had, I had done
something that I thought was
really neat, and it was
really gratifying to see that
finally coming out on the
display, that little happy Mac
face that you get when
you, when you bring it
up the classic MapQuest That
must've been like the moment
where you just jumped up
and cheered. Yeah, absolutely. I
was, I was at, I
was actually staying with my
mom over in Melbourne. I
just been visiting for a
couple of weeks. Cause I
thought I'd take the opportunity
after quitting my last job
to, to have a bit
of a bit of a
break from, from my life
in Perth, just, and I
was, I was over there
sitting in my mom's living
room on my laptop and
just, yeah, it was just
really, really gratifying to finally
see that working and then
rooting straight up into macro
S without any problems and
being able to click on
the Macintosh HD and browse
around and use a simple
text. And I've loaded up
with Mac paints as well.
And, and just using all
of those old programs that
I've used when I was
a little kid on my
mom's classic matchup. What do
you, why do you think
it's important for people to
do these kinds of exercises?
I mean, there's certainly the
intellectual work and there's the,
you know, the, Oh, gee,
that's amazing. But is, I
mean, is there a historical
significance for, for putting these
together? Yeah, absolutely. I think
that, that, it's very important
that we preserve all of
the, you know, history of
custom computers and all the
different stages that have gone
through and everything that's been
built to get to the
point that we're at now.
And I think that there
is a risk of that
being lost because, you know,
in the short term, that's
just an old computer, you
know, it's obsolete and people,
you know, don't want to,
don't want to waste their
time with some obsolete technology,
but then it passes that
point and it becomes historical
and it becomes something that's
different enough from what we
have now that it's, it's
worth looking at. And yeah,
seeing how we go here.
And in some ways what's
most impressive about looking at
the classic 1984 macro. This
is not how all in
different it is, but actually
how really similar it is
to the way things still
are on desktop computers with
windows, icons, mouse pointer, and
the animal, that stuff. So
I think for really seeing
both how far we've come,
but also how long these
ideas have been around and
kind of shaping the way
we use technology. I think
it's really important to preserve
that. And then also to
make it accessible to everyone
because emulate is typically a
not particularly accessible software that
usually made, but I'm fairly
smart, fairly geeky people who
are happy to dive into
a command line, but I
think this a value to
making this stuff available to,
to everyone. And so that
means putting it on the
web because the web is
really the platform is available
to everyone. It doesn't require
you to download and install
something and fight your way
through some complicated command line
interface or anything like that.
It's just, you go to
a webpage and it's there.
And I think that's really
the, the, the kind of
beauty of, of this, what
this embodies this project. Do
you think you're going to
take it anywhere farther or
are you pretty much done
at this point? I have
a lot of keeping a
lot of emails from people
who want to be able
to upload their own software
and stuff, to be able
to try out, for example,
an old app that they'd
got on disc somewhere, or
for example, a really popular
use cases. HyperCard a lot
of people really love HyperCard.
It was a really cool
tool that Apple released for
building applications, simple applications for.
And so it's, it's still
got a lot of people
have very fond memories of
it. And a lot of
complex little things were built
in HyperCard I think missed
the really classic computer game
was originally built in COVID
and certainly its predecessors, this
game coats belongs another one
called the manhole manhole. Yeah.
And so that was HyperCard
and a lot of people
want to be able to
try out their old HyperCard
stacks that they've made themselves
or that they're going on
a disc somewhere. So I,
I kind of want to
get that working just so
that people can like open
their own sex. Apart from
that, I think I'd like
to try and tackle another
emulator. That's a pretty big
thing to be taking on,
but I'd really like to
get, perhaps you liking because
Kimi is an emulated that
covers a lot of different
architectures. I think that one
is probably the one that's
most likely to be useful
for a lot of different
applications. And I, one thing
I think would be really
cool would be to get
a next step running in
the browser. So that's, that's
the, the operating system that,
you know, it was developed
by the company that Steve
jobs founded off. He got
kicked out of Apple, went
on to become the basis
for modern day macaronis. But
also it was the operating
system on which the original
web browser and web server
were developed. So I think
it'd be really neat to
get the original web browser
running on a web browser
only, just because it sounds
ridiculous, but also because I
think it's worth seeing if
you're really technically minded. Now
you can get working in
VMware, if you can find
a copy of next step,
but to be able to
share that to everyone, I
think would be valuable. That's
very cool. Well, people can
check out your site at
james' friend.com.edu, and I'll put
links to your blog, your
article on why porting emulators
to the browser matters and
people can check out PCE
dot, JS both on your
site and on GitHub. Thanks
for chatting with me today.
Thanks for having me. This
has been another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll see you
again next week.